In the sun-drenched student center on the Pennsylvania State University campus here, a few days after Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont trounced Hillary Clinton in the New Hampshire Democratic primary last week, Renee Tillman, Melanie Suarez and Kamryn Sandidge were picking at their lunchtime salads when they were asked if they considered themselves feminists.
The three, all sophomores, shook their heads. “I couldn’t even tell you what a feminist is,” said Ms. Tillman, 19, who is African-American. She and her friends note that the nation already has a black president; they see themselves in a postgender world. As Ms. Sandidge, also African-American, said, “I don’t find gender that important.”
A few tables away, Caela Camazine, a 19-year-old freshman, said she was “definitely” a feminist. Reproductive rights are her top priority, and the idea of a woman in the White House evokes her childhood dream of a career in medicine. It always bothered her, she said, when people referred to doctors as “he” or “him.”
“Having a female president to me means opening the door for that pronoun to shift,” she said. Yet she plans to vote for a man: Mr. Sanders.
￼It is as if Mrs. Clinton’s campaign, based partly on revealing the power of female voters, has instead revealed something else: a generational schism that threatens to undermine it. Mrs. Clinton lost the women’s vote in New Hampshire by 11 percentage points. Broken down by age, the results were even more striking: She led by 19 points among women 65 and older, but trailed by a huge margin, 59 points, among millennial voters, ages 18 to 29.
The responses to her campaign pitted mothers and daughters, set off debates about what feminism is and provoked reflection among women of all ages, evident in dozens of interviews and impassioned responses to an online query about whether it is important to elect a woman as president.
Many younger women already take for granted some of the gains that those before them fought for, and they identify strongly with their generation’s collective concerns — student debt, finding a job in postrecession America, and the fight for gay rights and a more flexible view of gender than their parents considered.
Older women recall their own struggles to break the glass ceiling, and battles in male-dominated workplaces. They feel themselves running out of time to see a woman reach the presidency.
Ann Wightman, 57, a lawyer in Centerville, Ohio, said she remembered the trial judge who “admonished me in open court that ‘if the boys must wear ties in the courtroom, so must the girls.’ ” Suzie Siegel, 57, a cancer patient in Tampa, Fla., said she was “determined to live to see” a feminist woman elected president.
So is Dana Whittle, 69. Standing in the cold at South Station in Boston last week, she took in a moment of stillness in the middle of an earthshaking personal transition. Lugging two massive bags, she was returning from South Carolina, having packed up her second home, which she was selling amid a divorce after 30 years of marriage.
￼Ms. Whittle, a part-time nurse, said she found the idea of a female president “extremely” important. She will probably vote for Mrs. Clinton. “I’m an old lady, and I’ve been waiting for it a longer time than most people,” she said, adding, “I burned my bra a long time ago.”
In Denver, at a climbing gym with a view of the Rocky Mountains, climbers scampered up gray walls as hip-hop played in the background. Madeline Schiebel, 26, a former fund-raiser for Planned Parenthood who works at the gym, said most of her friends — “open, forward-thinking people” — were backing Mr. Sanders.
“Maybe my mom’s generation or my grandmother’s generation, they’re like: ‘We’ve been waiting for so long. Things are finally happening. O.K., there is a woman, let’s get her into office,’ ” said Ms. Schiebel, who is undecided. “Whereas we’re more like: ‘Eh, well, it’s going to happen. Let’s make sure it happens the way it’s supposed to happen — in a way that’s good for the country.’ ”
Still, her view is not universal.
“A woman elected president means the world,” wrote Nicole Zhu, 17, a daughter of Chinese immigrants from Princeton, N.J., who bristles at the memory of her parents telling her that politics was for “white men.” Kari Hexem, 34, a New Jersey dentist, wrote how becoming a mother “makes me want to see a woman president, in a different way than I wanted a woman to become president before.”
Kate Black, 32, the executive director of American Women, the research affiliate of Emily’s List, which backs Democratic women who support abortion rights and is working hard to elect Mrs. Clinton, said, “Making history is important.”
She added: “But I also think that for women of my age, it’s not only about making history. It’s really about, how do I get policies in place that can actually
￼help me in my life? How does my vote matter? For me, my vote is connected to the policies that I know — like equal pay and paid family leave — that are actually going to make me more financially secure.”
Younger voters are also generally more open to big government, a possible explanation for the appeal of Mr. Sanders, who calls himself a democratic socialist. John Della Volpe, the director of polling at the Institute of Politics at Harvard, who has studied millennial voters the past 15 years, said his most consistent finding was that there are “surprisingly few differences” between the sexes.
“You cannot say this for other generations,” he said.
And in an era when gender identity seems increasingly flexible, as transgender figures like Caitlyn Jenner make news, “millennials do not see gender as binary,” said Celinda Lake, a Democratic strategist. Young liberals, she said, are eager to back gay and transgender candidates, “a uniqueness they see more than women.”
Ms. Camazine, the Penn State freshman, agreed, saying, “I think there would be more of a stir if there were a transgender candidate.” And while she would be “absolutely thrilled” to see a female president, she sees Mr. Sanders’s philosophy, and his emphasis on fighting inequality, as closer to her own priorities.
Democratic women, of course, are not the only ones reflecting on their own lives this election season. In Decatur, Ala., Cathryn Buse, 35, a stay-at- home mother and Christian author who said she voted Republican, spent years working as an industrial engineer — a male-dominated field that forced her, she said, to examine how men perceived her in the workplace.
“Are they questioning my decisions because I’m right out of college, or because I’m a girl?” she asked. Then again, she said, “I’ve hated wondering if I was hired because I’m a woman, and they had to fill that slot.”
￼Ms. Buse said she had been impressed by Carly Fiorina, the former chief executive of Hewlett-Packard who last week dropped her bid for the Republican nomination. Looking ahead, Ms. Buse has her eye on other possible female candidates, including Gov. Nikki R. Haley of South Carolina.
Polls suggest Americans in both parties long ago became open to a female occupant of the Oval Office. By 1999, as Elizabeth Dole contemplated running for the 2000 Republican nomination (she did, unsuccessfully), the Gallup organization found that 92 percent of Americans said they would vote for a woman. Ms. Lake said that number was inflated, because voters are not often truthful with pollsters. Still, when Gallup first asked that question, in 1937, the figure was 33 percent.
Yet as Kellyanne Conway, a Republican strategist who runs the “super PAC” that backs Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, says, it is impossible to divorce a theoretical question about women from the realities of a specific candidate. If young women are not excited by Mrs. Clinton, Ms. Conway says, it is because they reject her message, or do not relate to her.
“People no longer hear, ‘Do you want a woman to be president?’” she said. “They hear, ‘Do you want that woman?’”
Here at Penn State, among the many young Sanders backers is Abigail Kennedy, a 21-year-old junior, who is an author of a children’s book, “Madam President,” that is intended to inspire young girls. When she was in the fifth grade, she wrote in her yearbook that she wanted to be president. It still stings, she said, to remember that other children laughed.
Ms. Kennedy and her co-author, Nichola Gutgold, 51, a professor of communications at Penn State who studies the rhetoric of female presidential candidates, are a case study in the generational divide. Dr. Gutgold would not disclose her voting preferences, for professional reasons, but she said having a woman in the Oval Office was “important to me, personally.”
Her office is festooned with female candidate memorabilia: A Hillary Clinton novelty nutcracker, a “Barbie for President” doll from the 2000 campaign. “If you’ve ever been the only woman in the room, if you don’t get enough time to speak because men are doing most of the talking,” she said, “there’s a sense that you want to rally around other women.”
Ms. Kennedy feels no similar compunction. Feminism, she said, is all about having choices: “I don’t think a feminist has any obligation to vote for the first woman who comes along.”
